(Schama)
She's in ecstasy, all right.
Her head is thrown back,
her mouth open.
Her heavy-lidded eyes
are half closed.
An angelic hand is delicately
uncovering her breast.
You have to look.
You don't know
where to look.
A century after
Bernini created this sculpture,
a French art lover
doing the tour of Rome
came into this church,
peered at the spectacle,
and said,
"Well, if that's divine love,
I know all about it."
So what is this?
Surely not an erotic trance,
not from the most
devout sculptor in Rome.
No one who was
the bosom friend of popes,
a pillar of
the Catholic establishment
could possibly want us to see
a nun in the throes of orgasm.
Could he?
[Beethoven's Moonlight Sonata]
*
It's no good pretending
that ecstasy
isn't a physical as well
as a spiritual experience,
that passion doesn't
work through the body
as well as the soul.
Bernini knew all about passion.
That's what his art was about.
It was this physical intensity
that would transform sculpture.
No one before Bernini
had managed to make marble
so carnal.
In his nimble hands,
it would flutter and stream,
quiver and sweat.
His figures weep and shout.
Their torsos twist and run
and arch themselves
in spasms
of intense sensation.
He could,
like an alchemist,
change one material
into another:
marble into trees,
leaves, hair,
and of course, flesh.
The whole point
of classical sculpture
was to make humans less so,
to give mortal flesh
the heavyweight smoothness
of immortality.
So many of them end up
looking divine but bloodless.
But then
along comes Bernini,
and suddenly,
even Michelangelo's David
looks immobile beside Bernini's
whirling, twisting tornado.
If sculpture was supposed
to convey gravity,
Bernini would defy it.
His figures break loose
from their plinths,
flying away into space.
[hurried string music]
For as long as anyone
could remember,
Gian Lorenzo Bernini
had startled
the people who mattered.
Brought before the pope
when he was just eight,
he did a lightning sketch
of St. Paul's head
that prompted the astonished
pope to tip the little boy
as the next Michelangelo.
His father, Pietro,
was a sculptor from Florence,
seldom better than competent
and sometimes worse.
But in his son, he knew
a good thing when he saw it.
"Watch out, Signor Bernini,"
an admiring cardinal said.
"The boy will surpass
his master."
So fast
out of the starting blocks,
our little prodigy.
Bernini arrived
in Rome in 1605...
[footsteps]
just at the time Caravaggio's
punchy street dramas
were electrifying
the church...
giving it a new vision
of how to move the flock.
No more remote saints;
instead, the shock theater
of the earthy passions,
salvation in the guts.
So how do you top Caravaggio?
Answer: you can't,
but in sculpture.
This is Saint Lawrence
being barbecued alive
for his Christian beliefs.
Bernini was 16
when he did this.
He's trying to catch
the moment of transcendent pain
when, if we believe
the legends,
Saint Lawrence turns
to his executioners and says,
in a moment of macabre drollery,
"Right, turn me over, boys.
This side's done."
No wonder he became
the patron saint of cooks.
But there's something serious
going on here.
As Lawrence's hand
touches the flame,
a mysterious transformation
takes place.
The chroniclers say it.
The smell of scorched flesh
turned fragrant.
Pain and sweetness
become one.
It was enough to make one bigwig
on the Roman scene,
Cardinal Scipione Borghese,
want to adopt Gian Lorenzo
as his personal star property,
someone who'd make
his fabulous new villa
up here on the Pincian Hill
the place to see great art.
How the other red hats would
gnash their teeth in envy.
There was something larger than
life about Scipione Borghese.
The bull-like neck and head
sat atop a jumbo body.
Sly Bernini,
using a button
that can't quite make it
through its hole
to give us a feeling
for the flesh tight-packed
into the satin.
The holy man of the church is,
above all, a physical presence.
He looks more like a chef
than His Eminence.
What he was after, Bernini said,
was a speaking likeness,
because he thought that people
gave themselves away,
most characteristically,
either just before
or after they spoke.
So he works his magic
on Scipione:
the little fringe poking out
from the cardinal's hat,
the chipmunk cheeks,
the fleshy, blubbery lips.
Scipione's nose catching
the light in such a way
as to suggest
a film of sweat,
the natural effusion
of a big man in a hot city.
Rome: the holy metropolis
buzzing with worldly ambition.
For the church aristocracy,
it's not just the money
you've got that counts.
It's also the art.
Painters, sculptors,
and architects
are angling for patrons,
and the Rothschilds
and the Sachses of their day,
the popes and cardinals,
are gambling on the next
prized genius.
Bernini, of course,
has everything
it takes to succeed.
He's witty, charming,
extremely well-connected,
frighteningly cultured,
ferociously disciplined,
always delivers
when he says he will,
and he doesn't drink.
In other words,
the opposite of Caravaggio.
And how do we know all this?
Well, someone had noted
Bernini's every move:
Philipo Baldinuchi,
minor painter,
gossip, and art critic,
not that important
in himself
but someone who had collected
everything he could
from those who knew Bernini
and turned it into
his first proper biography.
[as Baldinuchi,
speaking in Italian]
(Schama)
This is Apollo and Daphne.
It's a story of sexual hunting.
Apollo wants the nymph Daphne.
She definitely doesn't want him.
He runs after her,
and just as he's
about to grab her,
the gods answer her prayers by
turning her into a laurel tree.
It's all action sculpture.
Apollo,
breaking his breathless run,
his cape and his hair
still flying in the wind.
Daphne, who's cornered,
isn't rooted to the spot,
except botanically,
and seems to be climbing
into the air,
her mouth open wide
in a scream,
hair and fingers
already metamorphosing
into leafy twigs.
But the tease of the drama
is the silky nude
that Bernini's
made available to us
exactly as she disappears
inside her protective casing
of tree bark,
a painfully thwarted
consummation.
It's not just me.
A French cardinal said
he wouldn't have it in his house
because such a beautiful nude
would be sure to arouse
anybody who saw it.
Bernini is said to have been
really pleased
when he heard that.
Bernini is in his early 20s,
a superstar,
someone on whom the mighty
and the powerful almost fawn.
One pope, Gregory the XV,
makes him a knight.
So Bernini is known
ever after
as the cavaliere.
The next pope, Urban VIII,
makes him his best friend.
There's a story
that when Cardinal Barberini
became Pope Urban VIII,
he called Bernini
into his apartment and said...
Bernini is Rome's
supreme virtuoso,
the emperor of the arts
and not just in sculpture.
He's also a painter,
a master builder,
and a playwright.
And he has everything:
charisma, swarthy good looks,
money, status, and enemies.
This is Francesco Borromini:
taciturn, neurotic,
introverted, depressive,
a man of absolutely
no social graces whatsoever.
For good and for ill,
Borromini would play a
pivotal role in Bernini's life.
The two of them would trip
over each other's ambitions,
spur each other on
to ever greater heights,
ever greater risks.
Borromini was
a brilliant architect.
He made walls and balconies
curve and bulge
where they had no right to,
ceilings that sing and throb.
If two men were responsible
for creating the look
of baroque Rome,
for making Rome, Rome,
those two men
were Borromini and Bernini.
And they hated each other.
At first, it was
a one-way rivalry.
Borromini resented
Bernini's popularity,
his hogging
of the limelight.
It's a bit like Mozart
and Salieri,
only there's no Salieri here,
no weaker talent.
They're both geniuses.
The rivalry between Bernini
and Borromini
started in earnest
in 1624,
when someone
had to be appointed
the new architect
for St. Peter's
and get to build
the baldachino,
the enormous canopy
over the tomb of St. Peter
located directly under
Michelangelo's great dome.
It's the plummiest job in town.
Now, at this stage,
Borromini was far more qualified
than Bernini.
He'd trained as an architect
and was the obvious candidate
for the job.
But guess who got it.
Mr. Charming,
Gian Lorenzo Bernini.
Of course,
the engineering problems
of forging the great canopy,
raising this twisty
gilt bronze monster,
were a serious stretch
for Bernini's competence.
So wisely, he gets help.
He turns to Borromini,
who had no choice but to help.
It was for the greater good
of the church, after all.
Architecture has always been
a collaborative exercise,
so it's not surprising
to find
that virtually all the drawings
for the baldachino
are by Borromini.
Does he get the credit
he deserves?
Does he? Hell.
And that Francesco Borromini
neither forgives nor forgets.
It's an unappealing trait,
this ungenerous instinct
for monopolizing the glory,
and it will come back
to bite Bernini.
It's not just Borromini
who feels it.
The assistant who did that fine
leaf work on Daphne's leaves
was so angry
at not getting his due
that he walked out
of the project in a rage.
But then the Cavaliere Bernini
always did have a cavalier way
with his assistants.
[speaking Italian]
(Schama)
His own mother complained.
So he took what he needed:
technical expertise,
grinding toil,
and in the case
of one of his assistants,
Matier Bonarelli,
his wife.
Her name is Costanza,
Constance.
Did she and Bernini have
a laugh in bed about that?
Here she is in 1637
at the height of their affair.
You can see, he can't
get enough of her.
And from the intensity
of all this brimming desire
comes an entirely new kind
of European sculpture.
Before Costanza, busts had been
entirely respectable,
and they were usually
reserved for tombs.
Only the Romans,
a long time before,
had used sculpture
for informal portraits.
But informal doesn't quite
do it for Costanza, does it?
How about intimate?
For this is a portrait
of a woman
whose passion is written
on her face and her body,
whose flaring temper just
adds fuel to her lover's fire.
This is what we mean
by lovingly carved.
It's as though Bernini
was reliving his caresses
with his chisel,
the falling away
of the blouse
perhaps the single
sexiest invitation
in all European sculpture.
There's something else
unique about this sculpture.
It's the celebration
of a spitfire.
Costanza Bonarelli
may have been the wife
of a lowly assistant sculptor,
but she came
from a proud old family,
the Piccolomini.
So her jaw is firm,
the rosebud mouth
is in the act of speaking,
and not deferentially.
Everything that was
supposed to define womanhood,
demure, chaste serenity,
is junked for Costanza.
She's a wild thing,
and the sculptor is hooked
on her temper.
But it's not Costanza's temper
that would end up
undoing Bernini.
It was his own.
Despite all the gentile charm,
Bernini was known
to have a low boiling point.
Underneath all those
social graces
was the bloodthirsty temper
of a Neapolitan gangster.
And in one
unbelievably shocking episode,
he lets it rip.
It started with a rumor.
Costanza, it's whispered,
was not so constant after all.
Seems she has a thing
about the Bernini boys,
since she's sleeping
not just with Gian Lorenzo
but with his
younger brother, Luigi.
Oh, it's hard to believe,
I know,
that anyone would want
to get their hands
on anyone except
Mr. Fabulous himself,
but could the rumors be true?
The trap is set
that evening.
Gian Lorenzo says breezily
how he has to go off
to the country the next day,
so he won't be in town.
But he doesn't go
into the country, does he?
Instead, early next morning,
he goes to Costanza's house
and waits.
Luigi emerges.
So does Costanza,
that swelling breast
Bernini had lovingly carved
flattened against Luigi's chest
in a passionate embrace.
There's a chase through
the streets, across the piazzas,
over the bridges,
right into St. Peter's itself,
where its official architect
does his best
to murder his own brother.
Gian Lorenzo grabs an iron bar
and smashes it
against Luigi's body,
breaking two ribs.
He's famous
as a miracle worker.
This time the miracle is that he
hasn't killed his own brother.
It takes a message
from their mother
to the papal cops
to separate them.
[woman speaking Italian]
(Schama)
And that's
not the end of it.
That afternoon,
Gian Lorenzo sends a servant
to Costanza's house.
He doesn't cut her throat.
Instead, he slashes
her perfect face to ribbons.
So the man who has cut stone
to create beauty
has cut flesh
to destroy it.
And what do you suppose
is Bernini's punishment
for grievous bodily harm
and attempted murder?
Oh, a really stiff sentence:
a 3,000 scudi fine,
except that his pal
the pope waives it.
"Naughty, naughty,"
says the pope.
"This mustn't happen again,
"so I sentence you
to be married.
"And by the way,
"she just happens to be
the most beautiful girl in Rome.
That should keep you
out of mischief."
Papal wink, papal nudge.
So Bernini is married off
to Caterina Tezio,
daughter of a Roman lawyer.
For his part in the fight,
brother Luigi is banished
to Bologna.
Everyone else goes to jail:
the servant who did
the razor job,
and insult added to injury,
Costanza herself,
convicted of fornication
and adultery.
And what happened to the bust?
Well, Bernini's new wife
wouldn't have it in the house,
which is just as well,
since Gian Lorenzo couldn't
bear to look at it either.
He might, I suppose,
have smashed it.
But luckily, a Medici buyer
from Florence snapped it up,
which is why
we're looking at it here
in the Bargello Museum
in Florence:
the Costanza that once was
and for us, always will be.
And you're thinking,
"I don't care
how good his sculpture is.
how important his art is.
"What an absolute bastard.
Please tell me
he doesn't get off scot-free."
Well, strangely enough,
it's exactly from this moment
of the crime against Costanza
that things go swiftly downhill
for the cavaliere untouchable.
And it all went wrong
in the place
that mattered most for Bernini,
the place that made
or broke artists and architects:
the Cathedral of St. Peter's.
This is the facade
of St. Peter's we all know,
but the aggressively confident
17th-century popes
didn't want to stop
with this.
They wanted two great
bell towers at each corner
above where we now
see the clocks.
It was those bells, after all,
that would summon the faithful
for papal blessings
and make
the Christian dream real.
But in the middle, of course,
was Michelangelo's great dome.
So the first designs
for the towers
made them respectfully low,
safe, squat,
one-story affairs.
Then along comes Bernini,
constitutionally incapable
of deference.
"My towers are going to be
taller than your dome," he says,
three stories tall, in fact,
almost 70 meters
above the original pedestals,
six times heavier
than the original towers.
Problem was, though,
Bernini's towers were about
to be built on swampy ground.
It's not that Bernini
didn't know about this
before he got started.
It's just that he's
surrounded by yes-men
who tell him
what he wants to hear:
that building tall towers on
dodgy ground is no real problem.
What he needs
are brutally honest advisors
who aren't afraid of spelling
out the risks he's taking.
There was one person
who knew
that building a tall, heavy
tower on unstable foundations
was asking for trouble.
That person was Borromini.
But it seemed to be
beneath Bernini's dignity
to ask his rival
for advice.
So without the benefit
of Borromini's criticism,
Bernini sailed
straight into disaster.
In July 1641, Bernini unveiled
his first tower to the public.
Two months later,
cracks start to appear.
Bernini takes to his bed,
won't eat, gets so ill,
he's reported near death.
It gets worse.
The cracks aren't just in the
foundation of the bell tower.
They've spread to the facade
of the main church itself.
Then, in 1644, disaster.
Pope Urban VIII,
Bernini's friend
and the staunchest supporter
of the bell tower, dies.
There's a new pope,
Innocent X,
and he sees it as his job
to get rid of all
the old favorites like Bernini.
After all, he has a new
favorite, Francesco Borromini.
So after 15 years
in Bernini's shadow,
Borromini's moment for revenge
has at last arrived.
An inquiry is set up
to deal with Bernini's towers.
Borromini submits
detailed evidence,
a lovingly rendered drawing
of Bernini's disaster.
"Well, what do you expect?"
says Borromini.
"The tower's too tall.
"It's too heavy
for its base supports.
"It's too unwieldy.
"It's built recklessly
on swampy ground.
"It's amazing, actually,
it hasn't collapsed already.
"It's all very well
going digging beneath the tower
"after the event to see
how serious the damage is.
"If he'd have asked me,
"since I know
a bit about building,
I would have told him,
but he didn't."
On the 23rd of February, 1646,
a meeting was held
at the Vatican
to discuss the fate
of Bernini's south tower,
but the pope had already
made his decision.
Demolish it.
The demolition
takes 11 months.
If Bernini had been
anywhere near St. Peter's,
he would have seen it
and heard it:
the winches, the pulleys,
the columns stacked on the roof.
Down came the bell tower,
and down with it
came Gian Lorenzo Bernini
from the height of fame
and reputation
to something like
a laughingstock.
It's 1648.
Bernini is 50, old by
the standards of the time.
So how did he survive
the humiliation?
One visiting English student
has him collapsing into despair.
He still does get commissions,
but not from
the biggest hitters in Rome.
It would take a miracle now
for him to redeem himself.
And then
that miracle arrived.
A moment
of mind-boggling drama,
a moment that wavers
between mystery and indecency.
The body of a saint penetrated.
The arrow,
withdrawn from its passage,
poised to strike again,
her pain indistinguishable
from pleasure.
The gasping woman levitating,
defying gravity
on rippling cushions of stone.
So who was it then
that gave Bernini the chance
to portray a saint in a way
no one else had ever dared?
You can't imagine
a more respectable patron
than Cardinal Federico Cornaro,
who came from
an old aristocratic clan
that wanted to build
a family chapel
in the church
of Santa Maria de la Victoria.
He would have known
about Saint Teresa of Avila.
Everyone did.
She died in her native Spain
in 1582.
But there was something--
many things, actually--
which made Teresa an awkward fit
for sainthood,
not least her levitations.
[woman, as Teresa]
A rapture came over me
so suddenly,
it almost lifted me
out of myself.
I heard these words:
"Now I want you
to speak with angels."
It's not surprising, then,
that of all the modern saints,
it was Teresa who still
had no chapel devoted to her.
The Cornaro dynasty,
who were patrons
of her austere order of nuns,
the barefoot Carmelites,
jumped in and presented Bernini
with the biggest challenge
of his career
but also the chance
for a spectacular comeback.
It was the most daring drama
of the body
that he or any other sculptor
in the history of art
had ever conceived,
much less executed.
Bernini would certainly
have known about Saint Teresa.
Her autobiography was
a best-seller in Catholic Rome.
Like everyone else,
he would have been startled
by the earthy directness
of her story.
[woman, as Teresa]
"Very close to me,
an angel appeared in human form.
"In his hands,
I saw a large golden spear.
"I felt as if he plunged this
into my heart several times,
"so that it penetrated
all the way to my entrails.
"When he drew it out,
"he seemed to draw them
out with it,
"and it left me totally inflamed
with a great love for God.
The pain was so severe that
it made me moan several times."
Now, if there was one thing
that Bernini was not,
it was crude.
He understood perfectly well
that when Teresa wrote
of her raptures,
she meant the longing
of her soul
for a consummated union
with God.
It was the way
she wrote about it
that made it seem
as if her soul and her body
were the same thing.
All of Bernini's
greatest body dramas
had featured figures
twisting in ascent:
Persephone's flight
from Pluto,
Daphne rising to the sky
as if to escape stony doom.
Now it was time for him
to make Teresa levitate--
this time,
not in escape from penetration
but in craving for it.
It was time to forget
about euphemisms.
The only way that Bernini
could possibly communicate
the flood of her sensation
was to make visible
what he knew of bodily ecstasy:
the face of a woman at
the height of sexual euphoria.
It's as if he's turning his own
intimate knowledge of carnal sin
into carnal blessing.
So of course, this isn't
the real Teresa,
a middle-aged nun rising up
her cell wall
with sisters hanging
on to her habit.
No, this woman
is unforgettably beautiful,
a match for the exquisite
seraph angel lover.
They are, in their way,
a couple.
Smily face is pointing his arrow
not at her breast at all
but rather
lower down the torso.
But how to make visible
both their union
and the tide of engulfing
feeling washing through Teresa?
And here Bernini has the crucial
insight of the whole piece.
He turns her body inside out
so that her covering, her habit,
the symbol of chastity
and containment,
becomes a representation
of what's going on inside her.
It's the accomplice
of her helpless dissolution
into liquid bliss.
It is, in fact,
the climax itself,
a storm surge
of churning sensation
cresting and falling as
if the marble had been molten.
And these billows
pour themselves
from the smiling angel
directly into Teresa's robe,
where they join
an ocean of heaving waves
that folds into
hollows and crevices
like surf
breaking on a shore.
There's nothing furtive
about any of this.
Bernini wants us to look
and look hard,
so much that he surrounds the
performance with an audience,
members of the Cornaro family:
some watching the show,
some chatting
about what it might mean.
There's every kind
of show lighting:
fake sunbeams,
hidden lights at the back.
And as Teresa climbs
to her heights,
the Earth really does move.
Look down here.
The ground is opening,
and out pop the dead.
Everything is shaking
and quaking,
even the columns
of the little chapel.
And here, Bernini adds
the coup de grace
to all those critics who said
he couldn't do architecture--
or at least Borromini,
who specialized
in weird, counterintuitive
bulges and curves.
The most ambitious thing
he'd ever attempted,
the bell tower of St. Peter's,
had come crashing down
in ignominious failure.
Now it was time for Teresa
to rise up and carry with her
the resurrected reputation of
the disgraced Cavaliere Bernini.
And you feel him,
when he's done,
standing back and saying,
"Right. Top that."
No one ever could.
The Cornaro loved their chapel.
12,000 scudi? No problem.
Worth every scudo.
Word got round:
the dazzler was back.
Even the sour
old Pope Innocent X
began to sweeten on Bernini
as Borromini skulked unhappily
through the Vatican corridors.
It's not that Borromini
never gets commissions
from the pope again.
It's just that
it was Bernini who triumphed.
So wherever you go in Rome now,
you're really
in the cavaliere's city.
Popes came and went,
but Bernini endured.
He gave up sinning,
became a model Christian,
never strayed again,
they said.
And what of the others
in this story?
Costanza,
with her cut-up face,
eventually got out of jail
with the help
of her long-suffering husband.
Borromini went on to become
the great master builder
of ever more eccentric
and brilliant churches,
but in the end,
he never really felt
he got true recognition.
Eaten up by jealousy
and disappointment,
he ended up
by committing suicide.
And what of brother Luigi?
Well, he returned to Rome
after his exile,
and, deep into his 60s,
he was at it again,
this time caught
in flagrante delicto
in the precincts
of St. Peter's,
where he was arrested
for acts of violent sodomy.
To clear the family name,
Bernini created this,
the Blessed Ludovica Albertoni.
For me, though,
none of those grandstanding
jobs in Rome
come close to this.
Why?
Because he's managed to make
visible something we all,
if we're honest,
know we hunger for
but before which,
we're properly tongue-tied,
some think which has produced
more bad writing,
more excruciating poems
than anything else
you can think of.
No wonder when art historians
look at this,
they tie themselves in knots
to avoid saying the obvious:
that we're looking at the most
intense convulsive drama
of the body
that any of us experience,
which is not to say
that what we're looking at
is just a spasm
of erotic chemistry.
It's precisely because
it isn't just that,
because it is somehow a fusion
of physical craving
and-- choose your word--
spiritual or emotional
transcendence
that Bernini's
Ecstasy of St. Teresa
is a sculpture that possesses
the beholder completely,
the longer we stare.
So perhaps when that
18th-century French connoisseur
looked at Teresa and said,
"If that's divine love,
I know it well,"
he wasn't making
a sly joke at all
but doffing his hat
to Bernini
for using the power of art
to make the most difficult,
the most desirable thing
in the world:
the visualization
of pure bliss.